---
title: "Impacts of the north and tropical Atlantic Ocean on the Antarctic Peninsula and sea ice"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2014-01-23
excerpt: 
date: 2014-01-23
venue: 'Nature'
paperurl: 'https://edwinpgerber.github.io/files/li_holland_gerber_yoo-Nature-2014.pdf'
citation: '<u>Li, X.</u>, D. H. Holland, E. P. Gerber, and C. Yoo, 2014:  Impacts of North and Tropical Atlantic Ocean on the Antarctic Peninsula and Sea Ice. <i>Nature</i>, <b>505</b>, 538-542, doi:10.1038/nature12945.'
---

[Official version](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature12945)

In recent decades, Antarctica has experienced pronounced climate changes. The Antarctic Peninsula exhibited the strongest warming of any region on the planet, causing rapid changes in land ice.  Additionally, in contrast to the sea-ice decline over the Arctic, Antarctic sea ice has not declined, but has instead undergone a perplexing redistribution. Antarctic climate is influenced by, among other factors, changes in radiative forcing and remote Pacific climate variability, but none explains the observed Antarctic Peninsula warming or the sea-ice redistribution in austral winter. However, in the north and tropical Atlantic Ocean, the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (a leading mode of sea surface temperature variability) has been overlooked in this context. Here we show that sea surface warming related to the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation reduces the surface pressure in the Amundsen Sea and contributes to the observed dipole-like sea-ice redistribution between the Ross and Amundsen–Bellingshausen–Weddell seas and to the Antarctic Peninsula warming. Support for these findings comes from analysis of observational and reanalysis data, and independently from both comprehensive and idealized atmospheric model simulations. We suggest that the north and tropical Atlantic is important for projections of future climate change in Antarctica, and has the potential to affect the global thermohaline circulation and sea-level change.
